# Predicting Material Hardship: The Role of Life Satisfaction

Understanding key contributing factors to life outcomes for vulnerable populations can be critical to inform policy interventions. However, policymaking often lacks evidence-based decision-making and rarely involves mass collaboration (Salganik et al., 2020). The Fragile Families Challenge represented a novel initiative in social science research, promoting mass machine learning collaboration to predict life outcomes for families in the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study (FFCWS) (Salganik et al., 2020). The study involved longitudinal data from a birth cohort study of children born between 1998 and 2000 focusing on aspects such as children’s educational achievements, family economic stability, and health (Thomas, 2022). Participants in the challenge were provided a standardized set of background variables from the FFCWS data and were tasked with creating predictive machine learning models for six key outcomes: child grade point average (GPA), child grit, household material hardship, household eviction, primary caregiver layoff, and primary caregiver participation in job training.

While the challenge was focused on finding optimal predictive models, the vast dataset combined with machine learning approaches also provides a fruitful opportunity to examine specific key predictors of vulnerable family outcomes. Material hardship is particularly important to understand as predicting economic deprivation can be essential to improve the lives of families in precarious situations.

Specifically, material hardship provides a nuanced view of economic struggles and the ability of households to meet their needs (Nelson, 2011). Meanwhile, subjective well-being (SWB) has been shown to reflect many individual factors and is associated with children’s life outcomes and economic hardship (Haines & Grimes, 2022). It is also measured for all waves of the FFCWS data as life satisfaction. With a focus on child and family well-being, this study seeks to uncover the predictive potential of subjective well-being for future material hardship.

Several studies have analyzed material hardship using the FFCWS data. This includes papers aiming to maximize the predictive power of models or examining longitudinal patterns of material hardship (Thomas, 2022; Altschul, 2019; McKay, 2019). Several studies have already found past material hardship to be a strong predictor (Altschul, 2019; McKay, 2019). Another analysis focused on child conduct and behavior as a result of family material hardship (Zilanawala & Pilkauskas, 2012). However, this is the first study to my knowledge to analyze the predictive power of subjective well-being for material hardship using machine learning approaches on the FFCWS data.
